---
layout: post
title: Detection of sex-specific genetic markers within the <i> Silene acaulis </i>  species complex
category: research
background: '/research/assets/images/bg_silene-sex.jpg'

---

Sex chromosomes of many model organisms are evolutionary old. In fact, in oder to understand the mechanisms of the evolution of sex chromosomes younger study systems are needed. During this project, I used a double-digest Restriction site Associated DNA (ddRAD) sequencing approach coupled to a privacy rarefaction analysis to detect sex-specific genetic markers in the evolutionary young *Silene acaulis* species complex.

Dioecy is relatively rare in the plant kingdom. In fact, only 5-6% of angiosperm plant species have separate male and female plants. The genus *Silene* is a particularly well suited model system to study sex chromosome evolution. *Silene latifolia* has been intensively studies in this regards. Dioecy has however appeared several times indipendently within the genus and the *Silene acaulis* species complex, given its particular biogeography, is quite exciting to analyze. In fact, within the complex, several sexual systems appear to exist: *Silene acaulis subsp. cenisia* and *Silene acaulis subsp. acaulis* being triecious while *Silene acaulis subsp. exscapa* being diecious. Even hybrids between these species can be found and the species are known to have adapted to different edaphic conditions.

RAD-seq has already been used successfully several times in order to detect sex-specific markers and sex chromosome systems. It has the advantages of (1) generating sequence data which can effortlessly be tested in PCR validations and (2) there is no need of a fully sequenced reference genome. The ddRAD approach was chosen as the use of two distinct restriction enzymes normally produces a lower quantity of markers compared to RAD-seq and allows thus the multiplexing of more samples in one sequencing lane.

My results indicate a very promising female-specific genetic marker within *Silene exscapa*! This is exciting because it indicates a system in which chromosomal sex determination is different from a simple Y-hemizygous system. In such a system, males would also have one copy of the X chromosome and thus a marker specific to the female sex (two X chomosomes and no Y) is unlikely. The results suggest a W-hemizygous system, as in this case with the females being hemizygous the location of the female specific marker could be on the W chromosome and thus never appear in male individuals as it would only be maternally inherited. If the system would be W-hemizygous, heterozygotes would need the information present on the W chromosome in order to be able to carry out the female reproductive functions.

The detected top-candidate marker encodes for a pentatricopeptide repeat-containing (PPR) protein. These proteins are abundant among terrestrial plants, are RNA-binding and have their physiological role in mitochondria or chloroplasts. This top-candidate marker could however not only be a simple marker, as it might play a central role in the very sex-determination mechanisms.

Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) is a trait which determines the production of sterile pollen and the consequently loss of the male reproductive function of normally hermaphroditic plants. This trait is determined by the plant mitochondrial genome. However, this condition can be suppressed by carrying nuclear genes called restorer-of-fertility (Rf) genes. The majority of studies about CMS has identified Rf genes that encode proteins of the PPR family. Thus, the identified marker could play a role in CMS, however it could also simply be a female-specific PPR protein not involved in CMS. In any way, having identified a potential female-specific sex-marker which belongs to a protein family often associated to cytoplasmic male sterility seems contradictory, is very exciting and seems worthy of further investigations.

I hope you enjoyed the reading! Should you be more interested into the topic, reach out, I am always happy to talk about it  :)